                                 TIME ANALYSIS

delaying the time analysis of [A] until the time behavior of the other sections
is determined.

first region comprises [B1-5]. first attack of the harpsichord announces the
start of [B]. the question of how to manage the introduction of the harpsichord
relative to the piano is answered up front. tempo set to quarter=135. [B5] is a
type of culmination. [B5] marks the first time all seven players play together
after the introduction. time dilates during [B5]. time dilation saturates the
color of (12). sounds like there are two occurrences of [B5] back-to-back.
denote these [B5] and [B5']. the reason for this will be because the oboe will
need a chance to establish its color after prior to time dilation in order to
make the dilation as effective as possible. [B1-5] undergoes a process of
rushing. the harpsichord becomes increasingly dense in [B1-5]. so do the
clarinet, violin and oboe over the course of their entrances staggered after.
at [B5] all four of the instruments of the fifth-octave polyphony of (12.1) are
at a point of articulatory intensity. the viola and cello layers of the slower
third-octave polyphony of (12.2) undergo no such process.

after the introduction of the oboe at [B5] the whole of [B1-5] repeats. denote
these two passes [B1-5] and [B1-5]'. the pitch-classes of all parts in both
(12.1) and (12.2) up-transposed in [B1-5]'. the resulting pitches expressed in
the surface move because of this. it sounds like there is an explicit
accelerando over all of [B1-5] and again over all of [B1-5]'. or perhaps over
[B2-5] and [B2-5]' after the sponged bass drum in (12.3) drops out. the arrival
tempo will be faster than quarter=135. the arrival tempo will have to determine
its relation to the other indications in the inventory. [B1-5]' effects a
subito change of dynamic to piano.

[B5'] follows [B1-5][B1-5]'. [B5'] dilates time. [B5'] moves subito forte from
the matte quiet of [B1-5]'. the change of dynamic intensifies the dilation. the
time dilation of [B5'] includes the lower-register polyphony of (12.2) in the
viola and cello. the time dilation of [B5'] begins to recede at when the viola
and cello fall tacet at the onset of [B6].

next region comprises [B6-11]. the upper-register polyphony of the harpsichord,
clarinet, violin and oboe in (12.1) fall out in a staggered pattern. the
strings introduce the on-the-bridge bowing of (3.5) incrementally. [B6] effects
a return to the prevailing tempo of quarter=135 up from the slowpoint effected
by the dilation in [B5'] before. the draw-down of (12.1) in [B7-10] persists at
quarter=135 inflected neither by accelerandi nor by decelerandi nor by
written-out changes in density of any of the parts. the exit of the sponged
bass drum at the end of [B10] leaves only the on-the-bridge bowing of the three
strings in (3.5) unmixed with any of the other colors. [B11] is a field. [B11]
changes the prevailing tempo by 2:3 down to quarter=90. the metric modulation
is effected during only the on-the-bridge bowing of (3.5). the on-the-bridge
bowing of (3.5) introduces a new rhythmic character. will be determined later.
a fermata governs [B11]. quarter=90 governs the fermata.

next region comprises [B12-16]. time becomes unstuck with the entrance of the
tam at the onset of [B12]. the tam precedes the entrance of the piano clusters.
what is the interval of preentrance? actually it sounds like there is no
interval of preentrance. it sounds like [B12-13] should collapse to a single
stage. the tam and the piano clusters enter at the same time. this subordinates
the tam to the piano clusters. but this is the color should sound this way.
it's clear that the rhythmic character of the piano clusters is strikingly
different than the rhythmic character of materials earlier in [B]. filled-in
pickets articulate the clusters. the remainder of [B12-16] functions to
multiply the points in the string and piano pizzicati of (9.1). a global
accelerando governs [B12-16] or [B13-16]. the irregular articulations of the
picket rhythms in the string layers of (9.1) contrast with the complete picket
rhythms in the clusters. sounds like the accelerando is from quarter=90 back by
3:2 up to quarter=135 in [B15] or [B16] with enough time given to effect the
feeling of the faster tempo. the caesura (described next) then effects a subito
ratcheting down of the tempo from quarter=135 to quarter=108. a tutti caesura
articulates the end of [B16] before the onset of [B17]. the caesura allows the
piano a moment to change modes of production from (3.3) to (9.1). the tam in
(3.4) continues through the caesura even though all the other instruments do
not.

next region comprises [B17-20]. [B17] starts subito in quarter=108. this is the
first time quarter=108 appears in the piece. after the tam exits at the end of
[B17] there's a game at play in [B18-19] when the four layers of the pizzicati
in (9.1) are all present. what characterizes the game? increasing density in
some parts and decreasing density in others. all four players are
tempo-inflected with exponential accelerandi on the order of only a measure or
two at a time. in [B18-19] there's a second case of exact repetition at subito
quieter dynamic (as in [B1-5]'). the way in which the piano brings (9.1) to a
close at the end of [B20] is important but can be left until the time of
writing. when the clarinet and circle-scraped slate enter in [B19] they carry a
new tempo. the tempo is quarter=72. neither accelerandi nor decelerandi govern
[B19-20].