                                 TIME ANALYSIS

delaying the time analysis of [A] until the time behavior of the other sections
is determined.

                                     * * *

first attack of the harpsichord announces the start of [B]. the question of how
to manage the introduction of the harpsichord relative to the piano is answered
up front. tempo set to quarter=135. [B5] is a type of culmination. [B5] marks
the first time all seven players play together after the introduction. time
dilates during [B5]. time dilation saturates the color of (12). sounds like
there are two occurrences of [B5] back-to-back. denote these [B5] and [B5'].
the reason for this will be because the oboe will need a chance to establish
its color prior to time dilation in order to make the dilation as effective as
possible. [B1-5] undergoes a process of rushing. the harpsichord becomes
increasingly dense in [B1-5]. so do the clarinet, violin and oboe over the
course of their entrances staggered after. at [B5] all four of the instruments
of the fifth-octave polyphony of (12.1) are at a point of articulatory
intensity. the viola and cello layers of the slower third-octave polyphony of
(12.2) undergo no such process.

after the introduction of the oboe at [B5] the whole of [B1-5] repeats. denote
these two passes [B1-5] and [B1-5]'. the pitch-classes of all parts in both
(12.1) and (12.2) up-transposed in [B1-5]'. the resulting pitches expressed in
the surface move because of this. it sounds like there is an explicit
accelerando over all of [B1-5] and again over all of [B1-5]'. or perhaps over
[B2-5] and [B2-5]' after the sponged bass drum in (12.3) drops out. the arrival
tempo will be faster than quarter=135. the arrival tempo will have to determine
its relation to the other indications in the inventory. [B1-5]' effects a
subito change of dynamic to piano.

[B5'] follows [B1-5][B1-5]'. [B5'] dilates time. [B5'] moves subito forte from
the matte quiet of [B1-5]'. the change of dynamic intensifies the dilation. the
time dilation of [B5'] includes the lower-register polyphony of (12.2) in the
viola and cello. the time dilation of [B5'] begins to recede at when the viola
and cello fall tacet at the onset of [B6].

next region comprises [B6-11]. the upper-register polyphony of the harpsichord,
clarinet, violin and oboe in (12.1) fall out in a staggered pattern. the
strings introduce the on-the-bridge bowing of (3.5) incrementally. [B6] effects
a return to the prevailing tempo of quarter=135 up from the slowpoint effected
by the dilation in [B5'] before. the draw-down of (12.1) in [B7-10] persists at
quarter=135 inflected neither by accelerandi nor by ritardandi nor by
written-out changes in the density of any of the parts. the exit of the sponged
bass drum at the end of [B10] leaves only the on-the-bridge bowing of the three
strings in (3.5) unmixed with any of the other colors. [B11] is a field. [B11]
changes the prevailing tempo by 2:3 down to quarter=90. the metric modulation
is effected during only the on-the-bridge bowing of (3.5). the on-the-bridge
bowing of (3.5) introduces a new rhythmic character. will be determined later.
a fermata governs [B11]. quarter=90 governs the fermata.

next region comprises [B12-16]. time becomes unstuck with the entrance of the
tam at the onset of [B12]. the tam precedes the entrance of the piano clusters.
what is the interval of preentrance? actually it sounds like there is no
interval of preentrance. it sounds like [B12-13] should collapse to a single
stage. the tam and the piano clusters enter at the same time. this subordinates
the tam to the piano clusters. but this is the color should sound this way.
it's clear that the rhythmic character of the piano clusters is strikingly
different than the rhythmic character of materials earlier in [B]. filled-in
pickets articulate the clusters. the remainder of [B12-16] functions to
multiply the points in the string and piano pizzicati of (9.1). a global
accelerando governs [B12-16] or [B13-16]. the irregular articulations of the
picket rhythms in the string layers of (9.1) contrast with the complete picket
rhythms in the clusters. sounds like the accelerando is from quarter=90 up by
3:2 to quarter=135 in [B15] or [B16] with enough time given to effect the
feeling of the faster tempo. a tutti caesura articulates the end of [B16]
before the onset of [B17]. the caesura allows the piano a moment to change
modes of production from (3.3) to (9.1). the caesura effects a subito
ratcheting down of the tempo from quarter=135 to quarter=108. the tam in (3.4)
continues through the caesura even though all the other instruments do not.

next region comprises [B17-20]. [B17] starts subito in quarter=108. after the
tam exits at the end of [B17] there's a game at play in [B18-19] when the four
layers of the pizzicati in (9.1) are all present. what characterizes the game?
increasing density in some parts and decreasing density in others. all four
players are tempo-inflected with exponential accelerandi on the order of only a
measure or two at a time. in [B18-19] there's a second case of exact repetition
at subito quieter dynamic (as in [B1-5]'). the way in which the piano brings
(9.1) to a close at the end of [B20] is important but can be left until the
time of writing. when the clarinet and circle-scraped slate enter in [B19] they
carry a new tempo. the tempo is quarter=72. neither accelerandi nor ritardandi
govern [B19-20].

                                     * * *

[C1] begins quarter=108 with the entrance of the oboe. [C1] marks the first
appearance of (6). [C1-9] constitutes a type of staggered and incomplete
presentation of (6). a pervasive experience of halting is active in [C]. a
conductor's fermata follows the exit of the oboe and Eb clarinet at the end of
[C1]. the circle-scraped slate continues during the fermata. the pointillism
the piano, xylophone and piccolo woodblocks introduce as (7.1) during [C3] is
handled as a series of short cells each followed by a conductor's fermata. the
cells equal only single measures and the fermatas are short. the flautando
pedals that the viola and cello present in [C2-C4] are not subject to this
experience of halting. the flautando spanners and the circle-scraped slate glue
together and form an underlayer. when the ornamented violin writing (6.1)
enters in [C4] halting is suspended and time feels as though it is moving
forward uninterruptedly for the first time in [C]. uninterrupted timeflow
continues throughout [C5-6]. the reintroduction of the piano, xylophony and
piccolo woodblocks at the start of [C7] brings the return of halting. halting
persists throughout [C7-8] but is relinquished in [C9] to effect the exit of
(6). global time-handling. tempo constant at quarter=108 over [C1-3].
accelerando during [C4-6] from quarter=108 up by 2:1 to quarter=216. tempo
games during [C7-8] with subito tempo changes after almost every fermata.
steady tempo at the start of [C9]. underneath the handling of (6) (10) effects
a density ritardando over [C8-9] culminating in the unrestrained strings (10)
in [C10]. quarter=45 at the start of [C10]. accelerando during [C10-12].
accelerando inflects both the incredibly loud string chord and piano clusters
of [C10-12]. [C] ends at quater=135.

                                     * * *

the return of (10) in [D7-10] reprises (10) in [C7-11]. the harpsichord and
string pointillism of (9) in [D1-5] activates a completely different part of
the spectrum between [C7-11] and [D7-10]. [D1-5] starts at quarter=135 and is
subject to an uninterrupted series of undulating changes of tempo. the exit of
the pointillism at the end of [D5] regularizes the tempo in preparation for the
reappearance of the loud writing in (10.2) during [D7-10]. there are both pitch
and tempo differences between the loud string writing in [C7-11] and the loud
string writing in [D7-10]. [D7-10] is up-transposed. the reappearance in
[D7-10] is not subject to accelerando. if anything the reappearance in [D7-10]
is subject to ritardando leading to the introduction of the block oboe at the
start of [D9]. the block oboe (2.1) in [D9-11] constitutes the climax of [D].
the material of the climax is loud and the tempo of the climax is quarter=45.
the staggered entrances of the tam (2.5) and the bass clarinet (2.4) in [D9]
and [D11] serve to shadow and to deepen the oboe. the climax is effected in the
oboe writing itself in [D9-11]. the oboe writing in [D9-11] is slow but
inflected with momentary pullings-forward and momentary holdings-back. a
pronounced ritardando governs [D11-12] and brings [D12] to a close. timeflow
stops phenomenologically at the start of [E].

                                     * * *

the string pedals (3.5) during [E1-5] are on-the-bridge bowing. constant
quarter=36 during [E1-3]. slow accelerando over [E4-7] starting with the viola
glissando and double attack in the piano at the onset of [E4]. subito change of
tempo, rhythmic character, everything for bright piano and xylophone attacks in
[E8]. resumption and completion of accelerando when glissando thicket returns
in [E9]. the end of [E9] attains the bright tempo of [E8]. bright tempo of [E8]
returns and governs [E10-12]. so the tempo of the bright piano and xylophone
points (7) in [E] also governs the appearance of the piano and chromatic string
clusters (1.1) in [E]. feels like the tempo of (7) and (1.1) in [E] is
quarter=108.

                                     * * *

the oboe + Eb clarinet duet articulating [F1-2] adds a transient layer on top
of the piano and chromatic string clusters at the end of [E] and the beginning
of [F]. feels like [F1-2] starts with a sounding fermata in both instruments to
build energy and then rushes forward and causing the (1.1) clusters in [F2] to
carry a faster tempo than the (1.1) clusters in [E10-12]. tempo resets at the
start of [E3]. the return of the glissando thicket in [F4-11] starts at faster
tempo than the first occurrence of the glissando thicket in [E4-9]. so if [E4]
started at quarter=36 and arrived at quarter=108 then [F4] starts at
quarter=72. [F6] will be removed. the return of the bright piano and xylophone
points (7.1) in [F8] picks up where (7.1) left off at the end of [E10] but with
increased density. (7.1) reaches climax as it develops over [F10-15]. the
points in [F10-15] should be especially striking. quarter=90 for the (7.1) over
[F10-13]. subito metric modulation by 3:2 up to quarter=135 at the onset of
[F14-15]. the gradual entrance of the third-octave interweave in the Bb
clarinet, viola and cello in [F13] plants the seeds of a slower tempo
underneath the ongoing brilliance of the points in (7.1). it is also clear that
the third-octave interweave in [F] is actually much lower than that in the
cello. third-octave interweave (4) operates at effective tempo <quarter=45>
when it first appears in [F13] and again in [F15-23]. there's a written-out
density increase in the harpsichord pointillism (9.1) during [F19-20] but no
change in tempo. quarter=45 persists up through [F21]. metric modulation by 8:5
up to quater=72 at the onset of [F22]. quarter=72 governs [F22-23] through to
the start of [G].

                                     * * *

[G] starts at quarter=72 with only third-octave polyphony (12.2) in the viola
and cello. perhaps the predominant dynamic of the opening of [G] is quiet for
one of the first times in the piece. this may be true even for the fifth-octave
polyphony (12.1) given to the oboe and Eb clarinet in [G3-7]. it sounds like
the entrance of the harpsichord (2.2) at the onset of [G3] is a counterpoint of
rhythm more than a counterpoint of pitch. in fact it sounds like the
harpsichord in [G] may be confined to a reiterated pitch or to reiteration
confined to a series of slowly ascending or slowly descending pitches selected
quasichromatically. it also sounds like the reiteration present in the
harpsichord in [G] is taken in some way from the ppp snare roll (10.2) in [G].
[G8] constitutes the climax of the unrestrained strings (10.1) in [G] and
perhaps in the piece. so it's clear that a substantial accelerando governs all
of [G8-14]. accelerando begins at quarter=72 and accelerates by 2:1 to
quarter=144.

                                     * * *

[H] starts at the fast tempo of quarter=144 which is interesting because the
opening writing in the oboe (2) and accompanying layers are essentially
pesante in nature. so the notation will be fast tempo with larger durations to
give a heaviness of surface. the gradual tapering in of the fifth-octave
polyphony (12) can continue at quarter=144. there's clearly a subito tempo
change at the onset of [H13] with the appearance of the piano and sponged bass
drum (5). the tempo change is a down-modulation by 5:8 to quarter=90. [H17]
marks the entrance of the closing material in the form of the retieration storm
(14.1) in the oboe and Eb clarinet. the first appearances of the material comes
from the outline of start-attacks in the glissando thicket (5.3) present in the
other instruments. and probably the first appearances of the closing material
are subject to a process of either halting or some other type of intermittency.
[H20] is special because that stage of the segment gives the complete color of
(14) in the winds and the strings. so there's a structural or literal fermata
over [H20]. there is also the feeling of acceleration or indeed literal
acceleration governing [H20]. the promise of the energy of [K] is first made
clear in [H20]. quarter=90 holds through the end of [H] even during the
increases in denisty or energy in [H20].

                                     * * *

[I] starts at quarter=90. quarter=90 holds constants during [I1] and the
introduction of the harpsichord clusters (11.1). but with the transformation of
the string reiteration storm (14.1) into the string tremolo series (5.3) at the
onset of [I2] an accelerando begins. the internal bowing of the tremolo series
(5.3) will give a sense of increase energy relative to the written-out
reiteration of the string storm at the end of [H] and the beginning of [I]. and
the gappiness of the cluster rhythm in harpsichord (11.1) can be used to effect
a higher level of acceleration. the overloud crotales (11.1) in [I4-5] must be
given a rhythm derived from that of the harpsichord clusters (11.1) but a
degree more dense. the rhythm of the oboe and Eb clarinet (11.1) in [I3-6] is
more of less exactly the rhythm of the harpsichord clusters (11.1) in [I] and
is crucially filled in with sustained material between the fluttertongue
attacks of the principal notes. so there's an accelerando over [I2-5] up from
quarter=90 by 3:2 to quarter=135. this means that the reentrance of the
reiteration storm in the strings (14.1) at the onset of [G6] now happens at
quarter=135 instead of quarter=90. the handling of the layering back in of the
reiteration storm over [I6-8] can be left to the time of writing. but it's
clear that [I8] is special in the same way as [H20]. there's a structural
fermata or literal fermata over [I8] and also increase in density or energy
during [I8]. whether that requires a change in written tempo will be left to
the time of writing.

                                     * * *

[J] starts at quarter=135 but probably decreases from there almost immediately
to allow for [J] to function as reprieve from the ending process of [H], [I],
[K]. metric modulation at the onset of [J3] from quarter=135 down by 2:3 to
quarter=90 for all of [J3-4]. metric modulation at the onset of [J5] from
quarter=90 up by 6:5 to quater=108 for all of [J5-6]. metric modulation at the
onset of [J7] from quarter=108 down by 2:3 to quarter=72 for all of [J7-8].
pronounced ritardando during [J9-10] from quarter=72 down to quarter=36 for
all of [J11-12]. accelerando from quarter=36 up by 4:1 to quarter=144 during
[J13-15]. [J] ends just before the accelerando achieve quarter=144.

                                     * * *

[K] starts at quarter=144 and maintains the tempo throughout. [K] admits
intermittent down-catenaries to as slow as quarter=36 but only briefly and as
a threat of derailing the primary tempo and as a series of intensifiers to it.